xxone familiar way of dismissing contemporary architecture is to say that this or that new
 building looks like lego. legos famous interlocking plastic bricks first went on sale in 1949
 just as modernist architecture, derived from the bauhaus, went truly global and four-square,
 cubist-like buildings lined city streets from sydney to san francisco. here, nearly 70 years 
on, is legos own feeling on the subject, the lego house visitor centre in the danish 
companys hometown that really does look as if it is made of giant blocks of lego. and, why 
not? after all, the legoland theme park is virtually next door, while danish architect bjarke 
ingels firm big has made its name with bold, highly expressive buildings that, rarely less than 
controversial, make perfect sense in the context of a brightly coloured lego visitor centre that 
can be clambered over and explored in artful, knowing and playful fashion.

musee yves saint laurent, marrakech by studio ko

every year, from his first visit in 1966, the feted french fashion designer yves saint laurent 
spent time in marrakech where he created his latest couture collections. now, a museum 
devoted to his work and designed by olivier marty and karl fourniers studio ko x which has 
a wealth of experience designing finely-crafted, minimalist moroccan homes x has opened 
in the city. its interlaced terracotta brick facade is designed to represent fabric, wool or tweed 
maybe, while the creamy smooth walls of the entrance lobby is silk-like. it is as if visitors are 
stepping into, or perhaps putting on, a bespoke building much, as they might an yves saint 
laurent outfit. the conceit works, because throughout this complex of venues v galleries, 
auditorium, cafe, library and bookshop v the museum is a homage to architectures equivalent 
of clothing fabrics: laurel, oak, stained glass, glazed bricks, lacquered surfaces, marble and 
pearlescent tiles.

hastings pier, east sussex, uk by drmm

strictly speaking, this renovated seaside pier was completed in 2016, when suggs, the 
hastings-born lead singer of madness, screwed down the final piece of decking. but, this lithe 
and festive structure came truly alive in the popular imagination when it won the 2017 riba 
stirling prize, architectures equivalent of the turner prize. alex de rijke and sadie morgans 
firm, drmm, worked not only as designers but also very much as part of the local initiative, 
led by the hasting piers society to bring fresh life to a victorian attraction battered by storm 
and fire, all too often the fate of britains delightful yet precarious seaside piers. a month after 
its stirling prize win in october 2017, the pier drmm did so much to rebuild v with its new 
multi-purpose deck and ship-shape modern pavilions v was back in the news when the 
hastings pier charity went into administration.

juergen teller studio, london, uk by 6a architects

set in an inner suburban london street, this subtle yet unpretentious studio for juergen teller, 
the german-born artist and photographer, shows how much can be achieved on awkward 
and narrow city plots. an unassuming grey concrete facade conceals a building formed of 
three individual blocks v offices and archive, studio and a dining room, with private quarters 
above v punctuated by garden courtyards. here, raw textured concrete is offset by abundant 
daylight, plays of shadows and greenery. the gardens, designed by dan pearson, echo those 
that sprouted naturally in london bombsites when, after the world war two, london pride 
(saxifraga) sprouted in and around buildings as ruined as those of pompeii. in its sequence of 
courtyards, hidden from the gaze of neighbours, the teller studio x as elemental as it is 
modern x is unexpectedly reminiscent of internally glorious ancient roman houses, 
squeezed into densely occupied and often awkward city sites.

louvre abu dhabi, uea by jean nouvel

the first outpost of the paris louvre is this controversial g3bn art gallery.  it is set under an 
unforgiving sun on saadiyat island off the coast of abu dhabi and in the company of what, 
when complete in the 2020s, will be an octet of spectacular museums. nouvels new louvre 
takes the form of a stylised contemporary medina based on traditional arab city centres, 
surrounded by walls and characterised by maze-like alleys. the museums 23 galleries are like 
individual city buildings shielded from the sun by the vast and intricate dome that appears to 
float above them. comprising 7,850 perforated and interlaced steel-and-aluminium panels, 
the dome filters glorious plays of light into the museums temperate alleys. 

napoli-afragola railway station, naples, italy by zaha hadid architects

this striking new station, one of 13 for italys expanding high-speed rail network, writhes up 
and over eight railway tracks, connecting once-divided outer suburbs of naples. it is both a 
spectacular, snake-like bridge expressing the dynamism of italys 300kph railways and their 
equally serpentine trains and a main-line station complete with ticket offices, cafes, offices, 
along with haunting views of mount vesuvius. because this is earthquake -and volcano 
-country, the intense and ingenious structural engineering of the building, by italian state 
railways engineers, is expressed throughout the forms of its dynamic architecture. while its 
sinuous structure appears seamless, the huge building is made up of individual parts that, if 
an earthquake occurs, will be able to move independently of one another. most importantly, 
the zaha hadid-designed station is also a powerful symbol of how, economically, southern 
italy might yet perk up.

tianjin binhai library, tianjin, china by mvrdv

the facade of this eye-catching chinese public library resembles a giant eye staring back at 
the beholder, and, of course, at the legions of tourists who will want to photograph this most 
photogenic building. the pupil of the eye is a circular auditorium poised at the centre of a 
swirling five-storey-high, eye-socket-like library hall. the halls vertiginous white walls are 
adorned with books, many stacked so high that surely no one will ever reach them. are some 
of them fakes? yes, of course. unreachable shelves are faced with aluminium panels printed 
in the guise of books. however odd and artful, this extraordinary library, designed by the 
dutch architects mvrdv, has been designed to attract local people to the world of books. 
the dazzling lobby is served by visually-restrained reading areas and reading rooms, meeting 
rooms and computer rooms. despite first appearances, the tianjin library is a functional and 
purposeful building.

elbphilharmonie, hamburg, germany by herzog & de meuron

opened to critical acclaim in january 2017, hamburgs long-awaited and hugely expensive 
elbphilarmonie was, perhaps, the architectural highlight of 2017, certainly in terms of new 
civic buildings. it ticks so many boxes. here is an operatic yet perfectly sane design bringing 
richly dynamic new life into an old urban dockland that had lost much of its purpose. its 
diaphanous structure rises in crystalline waves above a bunker-like brick coffee, chocolate 
and tea warehouse, anchoring herzog & de meurons magnificent concert hall into the 
existing fabric of the german port city. the interior is an adventure, as those of all great 
concert halls and opera houses should be. and, this is a destination at which, especially on 
bitter winter days when arctic winds whip across hamburgs waterfront, visitors can while 
away hours browsing, dining, drinking, staring at the views or, of course, listening to music in 
enticing, pitch-perfect conditions.

to comment on and see more stories from bbc designed, you can follow us on facebook, 
twitter and instagram. you can also see more stories from bbc culture on facebook and 
twitter.
if you liked this story, sign up for the weekly bbc.com features newsletter called "if you only 
read 6 things this week". a handpicked selection of stories from bbc future, culture, capital 
and travel, delivered to your inbox every friday.GVHHBHHNH